# Bioinformatic Methods
All code generated in this study is available in the following repository: https://github.com/Robaina/Dokdonia and has been organized in a Jupyter Notebook, with Python 3 as default programming environment.

## RNAseq raw data preprocessing and read counts
Pair-end reads in the FastQ files were first preprocessed to remove low quality sequences, adapters and contaminating RNA. To this end, we first employed AfterQC [REF], using default settings, to remove low quality sequences as well as to trim adapters. We then filtered out Dokdonia 5s, 16s and 23s rRNA sequences and phage ΦX174 sequences with a custom Python script available in the GitHub repository indicated above..

After preprocessing, pair-end reads were mapped to the Dokdonia MED134 genome (accession number: CP009301) using Rsubread’s function align [REFs] with default settings (allowing, at most, one mismatch). Read counts were obtained with Rsubread’s function featureCount using default settings for pair-end reads.

## Differential expression analysis
Differentially expressed genes were obtained with DeSeq2 [REF], a tool developed to analyze differential expression directly from count data via shrinkage estimation for dispersion and fold changes. To analyze differential expression between light and dark conditions for each temperature, we employed the Wald test within DeSeq2 using default settings and with a p-value cutoff of 0.01 and fold-change cutoff value of 0.5 to compensate for the small number of replicates (≤4) in our experiment [REF to Schurch et al)]. To obtain the sets of differentially expressed genes across temperatures --- under light, dark and light or dark conditions --- we applied the Likelihood Ratio Test within DeSeq2 with default settings and a p-value cutoff of 0.01.

## On the Likelihood Ratio Test
The LRT allows testing for significant expression changes across a range of conditions, sucha as time points or, in our case, temperatures. It operates by comparing two models, a full model and a constrained, or reduced, one.

## Gene clustering
Gene clusters were obtained with Clust, a clustering algorithm specifically designed to cluster gene expression data [REF]. Contrary to other methods, such as those based on hierarchical or K-means approaches, Clust minimizes the variance within each cluster and does not attempt to assign a cluster to every gene in the sample. As a result, Clust minimizes spurious assignments of genes that are not truly correlated. We employed Clust with default parameters with the exception of the cluster tightness parameter, which was set to 5 --- smaller values decreased the resolution of the clusters, producing aggregated clusters of genes with upward or downward trends across temperatures).

To use Clust, we first applied a TPM normalization to the raw count data using a custom function, and then selected only the genes for which the Likelihood Ratio Test performed by DeSeq2 was positive, i.e., genes which were differentially expressed across temperatures. Finally, we applied the default normalization of Clust for TPM-normalized data, i.e., quantile normalization, followed by log2 and z-score transformations.

## Gene function annotation
Gene function annotations for Dokdonia MED134 were generated using the online version of the EggNOG mapper [REF], to this end, we prepared a FASTA file containing all protein sequences from the GeneBank file with version CP009301.1. After annotation, we selected the KEGG pathway Ko annotations returned by EggNOG mapper and employed a custom Python function, getKEGGPathwayDict, to assign KEGG classes and superclasses to each pathway.

## Function enrichment analysis
We conducted the following procedure to analyze possible overrepresentations of KEGG pathways within each cluster (available in the custom Python function runClusterPathwayEnrichmentAnalysis). First, as an indicator of the importance of each pathway represented in a cluster, we computed the fraction, f_g, of genes belonging to the pathway that were present in the cluster. Second, we performed a randomization analysis followed by a sample p-value computation to contextualize the previous indicators within a random distribution. Specifically, we first randomly shuffled the set of previously identified across-temperature, DE genes and assigned them to clusters of the same size as the ones previously generated by Clust. We then computed the fraction of genes assigned to each KEGG pathway that were present within each shuffled cluster. This procedure was repeated n=50000times to guarantee enough statistical power. Specifically, the minimum number of samples to obtain a p-value precision P=0.005was set to k =10000following k14P2 as indicated in (Ojala and Garriga 2009). Finally, we ranked KEGG pathways within each cluster based on their sample p-value, with pathways obtaining smaller p-values situated at the top of the list. Note that we did not conduct hypothesis testing to assess the significance of f_g, instead, we only employed sample p-values as "signal-to-noise" indicators to rank pathways. Consequently, we did not adjust p-values for multiple testing since no hypothesis testing was conducted (the ranking order of adjusted p-values would otherwise be identical since p-value adjustment functions are monotonic [ref])




# Results & Discussion

## Analysis of differential expression
Two main environmental factors varied in the culture conditions employed in our study: light and temperature. Thus, we were interested in assessing to which extent gene expression was influenced by each factor. To this end, we first performed an analysis of differential expression between light and dark conditions for each culture temperature, followed by an analysis of differential expression across temperatures.

Employing a fold-change cutoff value of 0.5 (Methods), we found few differentially expressed (DE) genes between light and dark conditions. Specifically, we found a set of 17 genes which were DE at 10°C and 18°C, with greater expression in light than in dark (Wald test, \alpha = 0.01). Among these genes, we found a subset directly involved in the proteorhodopsin-mediated light-harvesting system (Table X), a system previously described in Dokdonia and which is ubiquitous in marine microbes [REF]. We also found a set of genes involved in light-induced DNA damage reparation, such as the DNA photolyase/cryptochrome and the Deoxyribodipyrimidine photolyase-related protein.

In contrast to the axis light/dark, we found  a large number of DE genes across temperatures (LTR test, \alpha=0.01, see Methods). Specifically, we found a total of 1724 DE genes, out of which the majority, 1317, were shared between light and dark conditions, i.e., they were DE expressed across temperatures independently of the lighting. In addition to this shared core of DE genes, we found two sets of genes that were DE expressed across temperatures only in dark or light conditions, with 206 and 201 genes, respectively.

## Gene clusters
We next asked whether we could classify across-temperature, DE genes based on common expression patterns. To this end, we employed _Clust_ [REF], a novel clustering algorithm specifically designed to maximize the number of co-expressed genes within clusters (Methods). _Clust_ returned 8 clusters with different expression patters, covering a total of 815 genes.